Update instructions on renaming or removing components from the release payload (#252)
openshift/ci-docs: content/en/docs/how-tos/onboarding-a-new-component.md

organization. Observing the process as it unfolds and maintaining good communication with the ART team is crucial. 

There are two types of component images in the release payloads:
1. Operators managed by the CVO - known as second level operators. If a [Dockerfile contains](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/c2bec26d3734e444666024858e76d4ca80dd31cf/Dockerfile#L12) `LABEL io.openshift.release.operator true`, the component is a second level operator. 
2. Operands managed by second level operators. These images are pulled into the release payload by virtue of being [specified in an image-references file by a second level operator](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/c2bec26d3734e444666024858e76d4ca80dd31cf/manifests/image-references#L9-L12). 

{{< alert title="Note" color="info" >}}
Before proceeding, it is important to understand the name you are changing. This remainder of this section describes how to 
change the component names used within the release payload (i.e. the names listed as a result of running `oc adm release info ...`).

> This procedure will _not_ change the repository to which an image is published on registry.redhat.io (e.g. [registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-logging-fluentd...](https://catalog.redhat.com/software/containers/openshift4/ose-logging-fluentd/5cd9744edd19c778293af093?container-tabs=gti)) . 

Author: Next push

To change the registry.redhat.io repository name, create a copy of [this ART team template](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ART-1443)  
describing the desired change. The repository on registry.redhat.io is called the "Comet Repo" and has no impact on the 
content / construction of the release payload.
{{< /alert >}}

#### Changing the component name of a second level operator

> It is uncommon for other components to directly reference the release payload component name of a second level operator. As such, name changes

Author: Adding a test users can run in the next push.

are relatively simple to achieve without risking the creation of nightlies. However, failure to follow all steps can lead 
to difficult to detect and important disparities between what is tested in CI and what is shipped to customers.

**Steps**:
1. If a name change was not directly requested by a staff engineer, ensure that a staff engineer agrees on the name change (`@aos-staff-engineers` on Slack).

> 2. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR1, against github.com/openshift/release to change the component's name in CI. In virtually all cases, this will be a PR against the component's ci-config for its main branch. A component's name may be specified in the `images.to:` stanza or overridden in the `promotion.tag:` stanza of a component's CI configuration. The new tag name should match exactly what will appear in `oc adm release info` when the component is listed.  

Author: The `n` release payload components I checked didn't use `promotion.tag`, so I'm removing that as an option and providing an example link for `images.to` in the next push.

#### Changing the component name of an operand
Release payload operand component names are referenced in second level operator github.com repositories. A change must merge in the second level 
operator's `image-references` file, or release payloads will fail to assemble after the operand component name is changed.

**Steps**:
1. If a name change was not directly requested by a staff engineer, ensure that a staff engineer agrees on the name change (`@aos-staff-engineers` on Slack).
2. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR1, against github.com/openshift/release to change the operand component's name in CI. In virtually all cases, this will be a PR against the component's ci-config for its main branch. A component's name may be specified in the `images.to:` stanza or overridden in the `promotion.tag:` stanza of a component's CI configuration. The new tag name should match exactly what will appear in `oc adm release info` when the component is listed.  

> 3. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR2, against the repo of the operator which references the old operand component name in its `image-references` file. PR2 should update `image-references` to use the new component name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR2, against the repo(s) of the operator(s) which references the old operand component name in its `image-references` file. PR2 should update `image-references` to use the new component name.
```

   1. On the central app.ci CI cluster, a release-artist should check the current registry.ci.openshift.org image associated with the component in the `-n ocp is/4.{minor}` release image stream. For example, `oc -n ocp get istag 4.11:{old-component-name} -o=json | jq .tag.from.name` should output a pullspec like `registry.ci.openshift.org/ocp/4.11@sha256:...` for 4.11.
   2. The release-artist should run `oc -n ocp tag {existing-registry.ci-openshift-org@sha26..} 4.{minor}:{new-component-name}` to establish a tag with the new operand component name.
   3. Run `/retest` on PR2. Tests should now pass.
   4. Unhold and merge PR1.
   5. Unhold and merge PR2.
   6. Unhold and have the release-artist merge PR3.
   7. It is not time sensitive, but before the ART Jira ticket is closed, the release-artist must remove the old component name from CI: `oc -n ocp tag 4.{minor}:{old-component-name} -d`.

> 7. Monitor the subsequent [CI nightlies on amd64 OpenShift release controller](https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/#4.11.0-0.ci). Continue to do so until you see a CI nightly produced which reports the new component name in `oc adm release info <ci-nightly-release-payload-pullspec>`. If a CI nightly fails to assemble, immediately report the issue to `@team-technical-release` and `@release-artists` so that the incident can be recovered as quickly as possible.

Reviewer: What is a `CI nightly`?  I normally think of us as having "ci payloads" and "nightly payloads".  the link goes to what i consider CI payloads.  Which do you mean here?

I see below you refer to ART nightlies, so i guess you mean what i have always called "ci payloads".  I think calling them "ci nightlies" is going to lead to confusion, especially since they are not built nightly.  People are likely to see "nightly" and think it's referring to the ART/OSBS built payloads. (i know, ART nightlies aren't nightly either, but that's the terminology we seem to have settled into from what i've seen).

Reviewer: > If a CI nightly fails to assemble

how can you tell if a CI payload fails to assemble?

Author: Changed to `CI payload` and included information about the error to look for in the next push.

> 8. During the next working day, check [ART nightlies on the amd64 release controller](https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/#4.11.0-0.nightly). Continue to do so until you see an ART nightly produced which reports the new component name in `oc adm release info <art-nightly-release-payload-pullspec>`. If an ART nightly fails to assemble, immediately report the issue to `@team-technical-release` and `@release-artists` so that the incident can be recovered as quickly as possible. 

Reviewer: > If an ART nightly fails to assemble

how can you tell if an ART payload fails to assemble?

Author: Added.

### Removing a component from the OpenShift release payload

**Steps**:
1. Submit a copy of [this ART team template](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ART-1443) to communicate to ART that a component change is desired. Take care to mention whether the image should also be removed from the 4.x+1 branch of ART's metadata in case it has already been branched.
2. Open and `/hold` pull request, PR1, removing references to the old component from any second level operator which includes the component in its `image-references` file.

> 3. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR2, to github.com/openshift/release which removes the `promotion:` stanza from the ci-operator configuration for the component & affected release(s).

Reviewer: only the promotion?  Presumably there's an optional step here where you also want to remove the actual build configuration for the image, right?  (if the image is going away entirely, not just being removed from the payload)

Author: Added that as an option in the next push.

4. Submit a copy of [this ART team template](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ART-1443) to communicate to ART that a component name change is desired. Include the PRs in the Jira ticket.
5. All PRs should be passing tests and ready to merge. No PRs other than PR1 should be merged in the component's github.com repository during the following process. In a synchronous chat with an ART team member or release manager (`@release-artists` in `#aos-art` on Slack) the following should be performed:
   1. On the central app.ci CI cluster, a release-artist should check the current registry.ci.openshift.org image associated with the component in the `-n ocp is/4.{minor}` release image stream. For example, `oc -n ocp get istag 4.11:{old-component-name} -o=json | jq .tag.from.name` should output a pullspec like `registry.ci.openshift.org/ocp/4.11@sha256:...` for 4.11. 
   2. Unhold PR1 and allow it to merge.

>    3. Once PR1 merges, the release-artist should run `oc -n ocp tag {existing-registry.ci-openshift-org@sha26..} 4.{minor}:{new-component-name}` followed immediately by `oc -n ocp tag 4.{minor}:{old-component-name} -d` to remove the old component name.

Author: Next push.

5. Submit a copy of [this ART team template](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ART-1443) to communicate to ART that a component name change is desired. Include the PRs in the Jira ticket.
6. PR1 and PR3 should be passing tests and ready to merge (PR2 will be failing at this point). No PRs other than PR1 and PR2 should be merged in their respective github.com repositories during the following process. In a synchronous chat with an ART team member or release manager (`@release-artists` in `#aos-art` on Slack) the following should be performed:
   1. On the central app.ci CI cluster, a release-artist should check the current registry.ci.openshift.org image associated with the component in the `-n ocp is/4.{minor}` release image stream. For example, `oc -n ocp get istag 4.11:{old-component-name} -o=json | jq .tag.from.name` should output a pullspec like `registry.ci.openshift.org/ocp/4.11@sha256:...` for 4.11.

>    2. The release-artist should run `oc -n ocp tag {existing-registry.ci-openshift-org@sha26..} 4.{minor}:{new-component-name}` to establish a tag with the new operand component name.

Reviewer 2: as above, need a note that this is the CI imagestream we're patching up, not ART's.

   3. Run `/retest` on PR2(s). Tests should now pass.
   4. Unhold and merge PR1.
   5. Unhold and merge PR2(s).

>    6. Unhold and have the release-artist merge PR3.

Reviewer 2: we should note here that in the gap between PR2 and PR3 merging (which could be extensive), ART automation will likely rebuild the operator with the wrong reference and we'll get a failed nightly.

we can avoid this if someone can green-button the PR2 merge and PR3 immediately after, but it seems likely to happen if we wait for the typical automated merge process, so it seems worthy of mention.

Author: I ask for a synchronous chat for these flows to minimize windows like this. I don't talk about all the poor outcomes of not performing these steps in quick succession, but I'll add a note on this one.

   7. It is not time sensitive, but before the ART Jira ticket is closed, the release-artist must remove the old component name from CI: `oc -n ocp tag 4.{minor}:{old-component-name} -d`.
7. Monitor the subsequent [CI payloads on amd64 OpenShift release controller](https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/#4.11.0-0.ci). Continue to do so until you see a CI payload produced which reports the new component name in `oc adm release info <ci-release-payload-pullspec>`. If steps in this process were missed, following the hyperlink for a payload name in the release controller will simply display an error message stating that the release controller was `unable to create a release` with a few details about the problem's cause. If this error is displayed, immediately report the issue to `@team-technical-release` and `@release-artists` so that the incident can be recovered as quickly as possible.

> 8. During the next working day, check [ART nightlies on the amd64 release controller](https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/#4.11.0-0.nightly). Continue to do so until you see an ART nightly produced which reports the new component name in `oc adm release info <art-nightly-release-payload-pullspec>`. If steps in this process were missed, following the hyperlink for a payload name in the release controller will simply display an error message stating that the release controller was `unable to create a release` with a few details about the problem's cause. If this error is displayed, immediately report the issue to `@team-technical-release` and `@release-artists` so that the incident can be recovered as quickly as possible.

Reviewer 2: Non-x86 nightlies are produced much sooner than x86 nightlies; s390x and ppc64le are nearly instantaneous. It would be better to check there first (even if the component isn't used there, it will have a dummy entry).
```suggestion
8. During the ensuing work day, check [ART nightlies on the s390x release controller](https://s390x.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/#4.11.0-0.nightly-s390x). Continue to do so until you see an ART nightly produced which reports the new component name in `oc adm release info <art-nightly-release-payload-pullspec>`. If steps in this process were missed, following the hyperlink for a payload name in the release controller will simply display an error message stating that the release controller was `unable to create a release` with a few details about the problem's cause. If this error is displayed, immediately report the issue to `@team-technical-release` and `@release-artists` so that the incident can be recovered as quickly as possible.
```

Author: I hate to rely on a quirk for a doc, but its a great quirk :laughing:  .

### Removing a component from the OpenShift release payload

**Steps**:
1. Submit a copy of [this ART team template](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ART-1443) to communicate to ART that a component change is desired. Take care to mention whether the image should also be removed from the 4.x+1 branch of ART's metadata in case it has already been branched.
2. Open and `/hold` pull request, PR1, removing references to the old component from any second level operator which includes the component in its `image-references` file.
3. Open and `/hold` a pull request, PR2, to github.com/openshift/release which, minimally, removes the `promotion:` stanza from the ci-operator configuration for the component & affected release(s). If the component is being completely removed from CI, PR2 can be the complete deletion of the ci-operator configuration file for the component / branch.

> 4. Via the ART Jira ticket, have a release-artist prepare a pull request, PR3, which either disables the component build or prevents its inclusion in the release payload. 

Reviewer 2: @bparees this should do that - remove the component entirely or just omit it from the payload. Did you have some other clean-up in mind?

Maybe something like:
```suggestion
4. Via the ART Jira ticket, have a release-artist prepare an `ocp-build-data` pull request, PR3, which either removes the component build or prevents its inclusion in the release payload (`for_payload: false`). 
```

> 4. Via the ART Jira ticket, have a release-artist prepare a pull request, PR3, which either disables the component build or prevents its inclusion in the release payload. 

Author: Will be in next push.

> 4. Via the ART Jira ticket, have a release-artist prepare a pull request, PR3, which either disables the component build or prevents its inclusion in the release payload. 

Author: Added additional detail in the next push.

5. In a synchronous chat with an ART team member or release manager (`@release-artists` in `#aos-art` on Slack) the following should be performed:
   1. Unhold and merge PR1.

>    2. Unhold and merge PR3.

Reviewer 2: ITYM
```suggestion
   2. Unhold and merge PR2.
```
